# Politics of the Nintendo DS Homebrew Movement

## Background Information

Since the Nintendo DS debut, Nintendo enthusiasts ranging from pre-pubescent
kids to 30-year-old college dropouts have been wanting to develop their own
games and applications for the Nintendo DS. Nintendo has stated that the DS
stands for "Developer's System". For those worthy enough to land a nice
developing contract with Nintendo, it truly is. However, most people will never
receive this contract, special permission from Nintendo to commercially produce
games for the Nintendo DS. In order to obtain a contract with Nintendo, you
must prove your worthiness by showcasing an amazing game or other piece of
software to them. You must have a stable financial history and expected stable
financial future. You must have ample funding to buy all the official Nintendo
equipment to develop for the system. Most game development houses don't even
get that far. Most games on the market today are put out by what is referred to
as a publisher. Game development houses will produce their game partially, show
it to a publisher, and the publisher (who already has this development contract
with Nintendo) will fund the game development house and market their game. All
this bureaucracy makes it very difficult for the common person to produce their
own, personal-use games.

This is where the homebrew movement comes in. Dedicated hobbyists spend weeks
reverse engineering the Nintendo DS hardware, just to make it possible for
common people to produce for the system (by providing a cheap alternative to
official Nintendo development). These dedicated hobbyists come from all walks
of life and cultures, many from Europe and the U.S., and bring with them great
knowledge. These people make up the homebrew movement.

## Is Homebrew Legal?

Homebrew is legal for a number of reasons. You own the hardware you reverse
engineer, so you are free to do with it as you will so long as you don't break
the law. Breaking the law would include breaking proprietary copy protection,
pirating video games, publishing illegally obtained trade secrets, or otherwise
trying to profit off someone else's hard work. Homebrew poses no threat to the
official developer kit, as it is so primitive in comparison. Even if you made
something to compete with officially produced software, it would be near
impossible to publish it. Companies often benefit from homebrew communities.
Although software pirates often steal from homebrew discoveries to pirate
software, the homebrew community abhors piracy and takes a strong stance
against it.

When you buy a piece of hardware, you own it. This means that you are free to
break it open, dive into it, reverse engineer it, and so forth. You may void
your warranty, but thats the price for learning the intimacies of any system.
The only illegal things on this line would be to put into production and sell
products made with patented features (without negotiating a production deal
with he patent owner), bypassing or breaking copy-protection, or stealing
software code. Reverse engineering to learn about how the hardware works and to
make something fun for the community is totally fine.

The homebrew tools available for game programming are far behind anything the
game company who produced the system could provide (the official development
kits). Game system developers have an intimate knowledge of the hardware, as
they developed it. The homebrew community has only outsider knowledge through
experimentation with the hardware.

It would be close to impossible to publish a game made with homebrew tools.
Nintendo would not license your game. It would be hard to find another
publisher who would try to publish something made with homebrew tools against
Nintendo's will. On other systems besides the Nintendo DS, this is also true.

Companies often don't have a problem with homebrew because it increases the
demand for their gaming systems and helps them to learn more about their
consumer base. One example of this is with the Xbox. The Xbox homebrew
community made the Xbox do things that Microsoft never thought consumers wanted
like playindie games, emulate classic game systems, run the Linux operating
system, and so forth. Microsoft then included a lot of these features
(excepting Linux, of course) in their most recent gaming console, the Xbox 360
via a system called XNA Game Sudio and Xbox LIVE Arcade (XBLA). If a company
wants to squash homebrew developers for whatever reason, they'll be smashing an
essential fan base that loves that company's hardware design and has the
potential to improve it (all at no cost to the company). Homebrew caused such a
high demand for the Xbox that it would not have been in Microsoft's best
interests to ignore or punish it.

The downside of homebrew is that software pirates often steal from the
discoveries of homebrew and use that information to bypass copy-protection and
to pirate games. Some companies may take a stance against homebrew for this
reason, but doing so is unproductive. Piracy is regrettably inevitable in any
industry. It is extremely destructive, annihilating game development houses
because publishers will no longer publish their games due to a high piracy
rating on the platform the game developers are developing for. Homebrew
developers know this, and as the amateur brothers of the official game
developers, they share the pain. Homebrew will usually keep all information
regarding copy-protection in high secrecy; even if they know how to copy games,
they will not share the information. The homebrew community does not want to
see the the system they so dearly love come to an early death.
