# Preface

### The Main Issue

You love playing games on your Nintendo DS. Every game you've played has been a
wonderful experience, each one leaving a lovely aftertaste on your gaming
tongue. You may have wondered to yourself what it'd be like to create games, to
offer your own software up for licking. You've drawn diagrams of games you'd
love to make, worlds you want to share with others. But how to go about it? You
think and are lost: you are stuck. Where do I start? Whats going on inside that
pretty little dual-screen box?

This manual is designed to help you get an idea of whats going on inside the
Nintendo DS. With a bit of effort and time, you'll be on your way to creating
your own games. Join us, the homebrew community. You'll have a great time
giving others a great time, collaborating on projects, and feeling the rush of
intense and under pressure coding for numerous programming competitions.

### The Solution

This manual is the start of the solution. In it, I will cover the basics of
programming the Nintendo DS starting with an explanation of the politics behind
the homebrew movement and through the emergence of passthrough devices, how to
choose between a Slot-1 device or a Slot-2 device, , how to choose a
passthrough device, setting up the programming environment, displaying
backgrounds, using sprites, and basic game programming techniques. All these
things will be discussed in the context of the creation of a simple game I
concocted one weekend entitled "Orange Spaceship."

### How to Use this Manual

I assume you know a bit of C or C++ coding. If not, spend at least 20 hours
making a variety of programs on your own in addition to completing some
tutorials. It doesn't matter what you write, so long as you make sure you have
a solid understanding of structs, classes, the heap, loops, bitwise and logical
operators. I recommend the following tutorial and reference as a great place to
get started learning, <http://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/> and
<http://www.cppreference.com/>.

Next, just read through the chapters one by one, making sure you understand the
current chapter before moving to the next. Code listings will be on a gray
background. Follow along with the code listings, writing your own code based on
the listings.
